[Source: https://www.reddit.com/r/Nietzsche/comments/et09kd/nietzsches_relation_to_nazism_and_antisemitism/]

In order to explain what relation Nietzsche may or may not have had to the Nazis, there are a few things that must be stated at the outset. I’m going to defer to the late Robert C. Solomon: First, the obvious: Hitler did not form the Nazi party (National-sozialistische deutsche Arbeiterpartei) until 1919 and he did not ascend to power with it until 1933, several decades after Nietzsche’s death (in 1900). In the plainest sense, therefore, Nietzsche could not have been a Nazi. Nevertheless, there is a famous photograph (“Exhibit B”) of Hitler staring eyeball-to-eyeball at a bust of Nietzsche in the Nietzsche Archive in Weimar in 1934…. Even if Hitler did accept or adopt some ideas of Nietzsche’s (and we have no evidence that he actually read much of Nietzsche’s work) it does not follow that Nietzsche is responsible for what Hitler did with those ideas. (Likewise, a philosopher such as Hegel is not responsible for the use of some of his political ideas by the Italian dictator and former philosophy professor Benito Mussolini, as Karl Marx was not responsible for the Soviet monster Joseph Stalin). So, we may dispense with the cheap accusation that “Nietzsche was a Nazi”. As Solomon argues, Nietzsche isn’t by any means responsible for their actions. But even if we leave any accusation of responsibility aside, this does not answer whether or not we can justifiably say there was any influence . Furthermore, if Nietzsche did influence the Nazis, then to what degree did he influence them? What relative influence did he have, compared to other philosophers and their ideas? Did the Nazis properly understand his ideas? An even-handed attitude towards these questions is put forth by Stephen Hicks: In my judgment on this complicated question, a split decision is called for. In several very important respects, the Nazis were perfectly justified in seeing Nietzsche as a forerunner and as an intellectual ally. And in several important respects, Nietzsche would properly have been horrified at the misuse of his philosophy by the Nazis. Did the Nazis understand Nietzsche? Before we get into comparing the ideologies of the Nazis with Nietzsche, let’s look at the evidence as regards their actual understanding of him. I would argue that the Nazis did not understand Nietzsche’s ideas, and that in all of the most important ways, he was actually diametrically opposed to them. This is why the Nazis expurgated the books by Nietzsche which were taught in schools – they were not honest enough to present his work in an unadulterated form. Stephen J. Vicchio writes: Under the Nazis, an expurgated edition of Der Anti-Christ , a few anthologists of Nietzsche’s work, and some unconscionable books about him gained currency. Hitler probably never read any of Nietzsche’s books, nor could any of them be used effectively in the expurgated form. In fact, very few writers have ever been as hard on nationalism, socialism, labor unions, Germans, or what Nietzsche called “party men”. Indeed, in Der Anti-Christ , Nietzsche says, “Of necessity, the party man becomes a liar.” It must be brought up, at this point, that Nietzsche was therefore not taught as Nietzsche , but rather interpreted through Nazi thinkers who modified his ideology to fit their own. Alfred Baumler, for example, was a philosophy professor who believed Nietzsche predicted the rise of Hitler and fascism in Germany. Baumler was called by the Nazis to Berlin, to help provide an interpretation of Nietzsche and a curriculum that would be acceptable to the Reich. His exegetic principles, Walter Kaufmann notes, included “the premise that Nietzsche did not mean what he wrote in his books”: The picture of Nietzsche as a great metaphysician appeared together with the conception of Nietzsche as Politiker ; not only are both theses defended together in the same book by Baumler, but they are based on the same principles of exegesis – namely, the concentration on fragments and notes which are willfully arranged to yield a “system” that is quite remote from Nietzsche’s own intentions. Deesz says in her discussion of Baumler’s Nietzsche der Philosoph und Politiker: The second part, which deals with Nietzsche as a political philosopher… appears to us more as a hypostatization of Baumler’s own political ideas… than as a representation of Nietzsche’s position in such matters. Kaufmann, who heavily criticizes Ernest Newman for his reading of Nietzsche (which is reductive of N’s work and rather accusatory), shoulders the blame for many of the Nazi ideology more heavily on Wagner, with whom Nietzsche had a complicated relationship. K. writes: Newman, while detesting Nazism, takes Baumler’s word for it that Nietzsche was a Nazi – and concludes: “Could fifty Wagners have led the nation into worse disasters than one Nietzsche has done?” Hitler, of course, knew fifty times as much about Wagner as he did about Nietzsche, and Wagner’s essays, unlike Nietzsche’s, not did not have to be expurgated by the Nazis before being used in schools. For a sample of Wagner’s writing – of which there is no question there was great influence on the Nazi party – we might consider that Wagner wrote in a letter to King Ludwig that the Jewish race is “the born enemy of pure humanity and everything that is noble in it,” and furthermore yearned for “a real rebirth of racial feeling” in Germany. In Newman’s own estimation of Wagner’s ideology, he notes that Wagner felt that “blood crossings have led to the nobler races being tainted by the ignoble.” By way of a concrete example of a Nazi misunderstanding of Nietzschean thought, it was not uncommon for the German soldiers to be referred to as the “Ubermenschen” when they were discussed in Nazi schools. Perhaps one reason for such an erroneous association is that Nietzsche’s works were edited by his sister, Elisabeth Forster-Nietzsche, in order to appear more in line with nationalistic thinking. She also fabricated a story that Nietzsche came to the idea of “will to power” while watching German soldiers charging the enemy in the Franco-Prussian war (that this is origin for the idea is almost certainly false). While Elisabeth was one of the earliest explicators of his philosophy in Germany, hardly anyone could be worse for the task. She married a proto-Nazi – a man whom Nietzsche despised, who believed, among other things, that Jesus Christ was an Aryan. Nietzsche wrote that Elisabeth “lacks any sense for fine, and even for crude, logical distinctions; her thinking is void of even the least logical consistency; and she lacks any sense of objectivity.” As regards her marriage and her associations with anti-Semitism, he wrote to her that, “you have gone over to my antipodes…I will not conceal that I consider this engagement an insult – or a stupidity which will harm you as much as me.” To briefly summarize: the Nazis in general cannot be said to understand Nietzsche’s ideas, since they were not presented honestly and in full. The differences in Nietzsche’s ideology and Nazism had to be covered up or outright altered before he could be taught. Comparing Nietzsche’s Ideas with Nazi Ideology Hicks identifies five major differences between Nietzsche and the Nazis: We have five significant partings of the ways between Nietzsche and the Nazis: The Nazis believe the German Aryan to be racially superior—while Nietzsche believes that the superior types can be manifested in any racial type. 2. The Nazis believe contemporary German culture to be the highest and the best hope for the world—while Nietzsche holds contemporary German culture to be degenerate and to be infecting the rest of the world. 3. The Nazis are enthusiastically anti-Semitic—while Nietzsche sees anti-Semitism to be a moral sickness. 4. The Nazis hate all things Jewish—while Nietzsche praises the Jews for their toughness, their intelligence, and their sheer survival ability. 5. And finally, the Nazis see Christianity to be radically different and much superior to Judaism—while Nietzsche believes Judaism and Christianity to be essentially the same, with Christianity being in fact a worse and more dangerous variation of Judaism. To elaborate on these differences, I want to focus broadly on German Nationalism and Antisemitism, since these are the ideas that the Nazis are most well-known for, and furthermore these ideas are responsible for the worst crimes of the Nazi regime. What did Nietzsche think of German Nationalism? When it comes to Germany, Nietzsche was hyper-critical: both of German culture and its nationalism. He complained, as German culture grew into economic and cultural influence over Europe, that “Aryan influence has corrupted all the world.” (WP 142; 145) He disliked ‘Teutonism’ – the German claim to some sort of racial superiority based on a lineage of past warriors and conquerors – and wrote that “between the old Germanic tribes and us Germans there exists hardly a conceptual relationship, let alone one of blood.” (GM 1:11) He constantly praises the French thinkers of the Enlightenment and condemns the German philosophers as engaging in deception and Tartuffery – by merely transmuting religious metaphysics into philosophical metaphysics. Nietzsche himself did not identify personally with Germany: he considered himself the descendant of Polish nobility (he wasn’t, in actuality), and renounced Prussian citizenship near the end of his life. To compare Nietzsche again with Wagner, he wrote in Ecce Homo, “What did I never forgive Wagner? …that he became reichs-deutsch .” (II:5) As regards nationalism – Nietzsche found loyalty to the state to be both weak-minded behavior, and antithetical to his goal of a “mixed race, that of the European man… as a result of continual crossbreeding.” (HH 475) Nietzsche said that nationalists want to work “as little as possible with their heads”, and that “in nationalism, men hate and envy the outstanding individuals who develop on their own and are not willing to let themselves be placed into the rank and file for the purpose of mass action.” (HH 480) He admits that, for many people, loyalty to the right kind of state (in N’s view, an aristocratic state) may be appropriate to their capacities; however, Nietzsche nevertheless considers the modern form this has taken (and the one used by the Nazis to seize power) to be degenerate and “stupid”. His view of party politics and popular movements is related to his criticism of democracy, but applies to both socialists and fascists: “All political parties today have in common a demagogic character and the intention of influencing the masses; because of this intention, all of them are obliged to transform their principles into great frescoes of stupidity.” (HH 438). Zarathustra, furthermore, is not kind in his assessment of ‘the state’: A state? What is that? Well! open now your ears unto me, for now will I say unto you my word concerning the death of peoples. A state, is called the coldest of all cold monsters. Coldly lieth it also; and this lie creepeth from its mouth: "I, the state, am the people." It is a lie! Creators were they who created peoples, and hung a faith and a love over them: thus they served life…. The state, I call it, where all are poison-drinkers, the good and the bad: the state, where all lose themselves, the good and the bad: the state, where the slow suicide of all—is called "life." …. Towards the throne they all strive: it is their madness—as if happiness sat on the throne! Ofttimes sitteth filth on the throne.- and ofttimes also the throne on filth. (TSZ 11: The New Idol) Nietzsche’s ideas on creating a new “European man” were related to both his wish for “the destruction of nations” and his pro-Semitic viewpoints. Nietzsche claimed that nationalism served only dynastic families, certain social classes and commercial interests, and “once a man has understood this, he should be undaunted in presenting himself as a good European, and should work actively on the merging of nations.” He sees the Jews, therefore, not as a problem to be solved as many European nations had, writing, “the whole problem of the Jews exists only within national states inasmuch as their energy and higher intelligence, their capital of spirit and will… awakens envy and hatred… As soon as it is no longer a matter of preserving nations, but rather producing the strongest possible mixed European race, the Jew becomes as useful and desirable an ingredient as any other national quantity.” (HH 475) What was Nietzsche’s view on anti-Semitism? There is a famous passage in Beyond Good and Evil where Nietzsche expresses gratitude to the Jewish people: What Europe owes to the Jews? Many things both good and bad, but mainly one thing that is both best and worst: the grand style in morality, the horror and majesty of infinite demands, infinite meanings, the whole romanticism and sublimity of the morally questionable – and, consequently, precisely the most appealing, insidious, and exceptional aspect of those plays of colors and seductions to life in whose afterglow the sky of our present European culture, its evening sky, glows away – perhaps goes away. This is why, among the spectators and philosophers, artists like us regard the Jews with – gratitude. (BGE 250) As such, Nietzsche famously disapproved of anti-Semitism. He wrote to his sister – following her marriage to the outspoken anti-Semite Bernhard Forster, a letter that makes clear that his primary problem was with Forster’s anti-Jewish hatred: “One of the greatest stupidities you have committed – for yourself and for me! Your association with an anti-Semitic chief expresses a foreignness to my whole way of life which fills me ever again with ire or melancholy.” While there are a number of reasons for Nietzsche’s break with Wagner, anti-Semitism is at least one of the main reasons. In summarizing his break with Wagner, he writes: “…I said farewell to Wagner in my heart…since Wagner moved to Germany, he had condescended step-by-step to everything I despise – even to anti-Semitism.” (NCW, “How I Broke Away with Wagner” I). He opined in BGE that Germany should “expel the anti-Semitic squallers out of the country,” and later in his last letter to Overbeck fantasized about having all the major anti-Semitic figures in Germany shot. (published first in Neue Schweizer Rundschau, April 1955, p. 721) Given the extent of the Nazis’ crimes against the Jewish people and against humanity generally, there is hardly anything that would have hurt Nietzsche more badly than to know that his ideas were being appropriated by such people. In my opinion, the magnitude of the crimes of the Holocaust, and the millions of deaths in fight against Nazi imperialism, anti-Semitism and nationalism must be considered the Nazis’ most significant characteristics – just as a serial killer like BTK’s legacy will always be his sadistic murders, not the fact that he also wrote poetry. Thus, in the most significant respects Nietzsche is as opposed to the Nazis as possible. Christianity compared with Judaism As Hicks notes, the Nazis generally held Christianity to be superior to Judaism. Bernhard Forster, for example, wrote that “on the dark background of the most depraved of all nations [the Jews], the bright future of the Saviour of the world would stand out more impressively.” Forster was continually in tension over this belief – since he held simultaneously that Jesus was a Teutonic Aryan and that the German people therefore had a special destiny, but also that it was lamentable that the German people had parted with Wotan. This kind of dual-admiration for paganism and Christianity exemplifies the Nazi attitude among their intellectuals. The eclectic or even ecumenical character of the Nazi ideology as regards religion may owe something to the occultism/esotericism of some of the party’s founding members. Rudolf Hess, Alfred Rosenberg, Hans Frank, Julius Lehmann, Gottfried Feder, Dietrich Eckart, and Karl Harrer were all members of the Thule society – a group which was primarily concerned with occult racial theories, the destiny of Aryans, and anti-Semitism. Part of their oath was a “blood declaration of faith”, wherein the prospective member stated: “The signer hereby swears to the best of his knowledge and belief that no Jewish or coloured blood flows in either his or in his wife's veins, and that among their ancestors are no members of the coloured races.” Himmler, head of the S.S., was also famous for his occultism, constructing his black sun logo out of multiple ‘Sieg’ runes, and got much of his ideas from the discredited Oera Linga Book (a false creation myth and history for Germany). There’s no evidence Hitler attended the Thule Society, though it seems that he rejected his Catholic upbringing, and agreed with Forster that Jesus was “an Aryan fighter”. Hitler’s Christianity – the type which he promoted within the party and in Mein Kampf – was described as “Positive Christianity”, and rejected both the divinity of Jesus and the parts of the Bible deemed “too Jewish”. While he expressed great hostility to the church, he nevertheless wrote that he could not leave it “for tactical reasons”. While Hitler was critical of many religions, many historians consider him to have been a secular theist. Speer wrote that Hitler would say: “You see, it's been our misfortune to have the wrong religion. Why didn't we have the religion of the Japanese, who regard sacrifice for the fatherland as the highest good? The Mohammedan religion too would have been much more compatible to us than Christianity. Why did it have to be Christianity with its meekness and flabbiness?” To summarize what has been noted so far – the Nazi view of religion was multifaceted and difficult to encapsulate in a coherent manner to compare with Nietzsche’s views. That being said, we can say that Nietzsche would have disagreed with the Nazi assessment of Christianity’s superiority or opposition to Judaism. He wrote that “Christianity issued from Judaism”, and that “Jesus and Saul [St. Paul]” were “the two most Jewish Jews perhaps who ever lived.” What he meant by this (in the case of Jesus at least) was that Jesus completely embodied the rejection of the material world (through his “instinctive hatred of reality”), and the ‘Chandala morality’ of the Jews: The whole psychology of the "gospels" lacks the concept of guilt and punishment, as also that of reward. "Sin," any sort of aloofness between God and man, is done away with – this is precisely what constitutes the "glad tidings". Eternal bliss is not promised, it is not bound up with certain conditions; it is the only reality -- the rest consists only of signs wherewith to speak about it.... (Anti-Christ 33) While Nietzsche believes that this was a view of life that is based on error, he nevertheless praised Jesus, writing: “there was never more than one Christian, and he died on the Cross. The "gospel" died on the cross. That which thenceforward was called "gospel" was the reverse of that "gospel" that Christ had lived: it was "evil tidings", a dysangel … Looked at more closely, there ruled in him, notwithstanding all his faith, only instincts -- and what instincts!....” (AC 39) As we can infer from this passage, Nietzsche, in contrast with the Nazis, looks upon Jesus – that most Jewish of all Jews – more favorably than on his gentile Christian followers of subsequent generations, whom he described as hard, northern, barbaric souls, who wanted to inflict pain on others and on themselves. Thus, while Nietzsche was given not to such simpleminded categorization, if he were forced to say which of the two religions was “superior”, we have good reason to say he would have said picked Judaism. We might further explore Nietzsche’s attitude towards Christianity in terms of his personal life. While he did commission a headstone with a verse from Corinthians etched upon on it, in memory of his Lutheran pastor father, he nevertheless had considered himself long liberated from rural German Christianity by the time he earned a professorship. He often wrote unfavorably about German Christians; when he broke with Wagner, Wagner’s Christian leanings were central to Nietzsche’s reasons. Wagner had written Parsifal – an opera which placed Christian themes, such as those of salvation or redemption, into a mythic, pagan context. This kind of harmonizing of German pagan elements with Christian elements would later become a fascination of the Nazis, as we’ve discussed. Nietzsche wrote in the HH second volume’s preface: “Richard Wagner, who seemed all-conquering, but was in reality only a decayed and despairing romantic, suddenly collapsed, helpless and broken, before the Christian Cross”. While Nietzsche did yearn for a revival of “the Dionysian” – an artistic impulse that he felt was sorely lacking in German culture – and at times spoke admiringly of barbarians and pagan religion (especially the Greek view of religion), he cannot be compared to the Nazis in terms insofar as he never entertained occult or metaphysical ideas about reality. Nietzsche considered even philosophic systems to be a falsification of the world, and felt Schopenhauer’s greatest errors were caused by his absorption in metaphysics. All this is to say that Nietzsche wasn’t actually pouring out libations to Dionysus in literal worship of him as a deity (as, for example, Percy Bysshe Shelley and Thomas Love Peacock had). The merely expedient religiosity of the upper echelon Nazis is probably the biggest similarity with Nietzsche’s thought (or Machiavelli’s, for that matter). These include the positions of Hitler and others: total skepticism towards religion, but rejection of materialism – coupled with the view that religion might be useful for a ruler for tactical reasons. Nietzsche wrote that the aristocracy had much to gain by fostering religious belief for the masses: “For religion appeases the individual soul in times of loss, privation, fear, or mistrust, that is, when government feels itself unable to do anything directly to alleviate the private man's inner suffering; even during universal, inevitable, and initially unpreventable misfortunes (famines, financial crises, wars), religion gives the masses a calm, patient and trusting bearing… It is to be presumed that ruling persons and classes will be enlightened about the benefit provided them by religion, and thus feel somewhat superior to it, in that they are using it as a tool”. (HH 472) Were there other similarities between Nietzsche and the Nazis? Hicks, of course, also noted five similarities between Nietzsche and the Nazis, which he briefly outlines here: …to summarize: we have five significant connections between Nietzsche and the Nazis: The Nazis were strongly collectivistic, and Nietzsche, with some qualifications, also advances strongly collectivistic and anti-individualistic themes. 2. Both Nietzsche and the Nazis see zero-sum conflict as inescapable and as fundamental to the human condition. 3. Both are irrationalists in their psychological theories, downplaying radically the role that reason plays in life and emphasizing the power and the glory of instincts and feelings. 4. Both Nietzsche and the Nazis accept willingly—even longingly—that war is necessary, healthy, and even majestic. 5. And finally, both Nietzsche and the Nazis are anti-democratic, anti-capitalistic, and anti-liberal—and so, come the 1930s, the Nazis were in fundamental opposition to those nations to the West that were still broadly committed to democracy, capitalism, and liberalism. Even here, however, we must stress “a few qualifications” (as Hicks puts it). In my opinion, even where Nietzsche does share similarities with the Nazis, the similarity is either: superficial; or else, easily derived from elsewhere and by no means dependent on Nietzsche. Was Nietzsche a collectivist? Sort of. He believed that a strong state achieved a kind of permanence, and that future generations should be invested in inter-generational health and flourishing of their society (and for this reason advocated that men involved in government should have children, so that they have some stake in the future). However, this must be qualified with his views on nationalism, shared above – and understood that he opposed socialism with equal vigor. Coupled with his disdain for party politics and democracy, we must conclude that the term “collectivism” in the sense commonly-used today might actually be a poor description for Nietzsche. The long and short of it is that Nietzsche didn’t think that people were really “individuals” that could be trusted to govern, and so the lot for most people would be submission to the government and culture of society at large. More properly, he agreed with aristocracy – “rule by the best” – and therefore thought that most people should have no say in politics, meaning that their political role was merely to serve the society at large and not to effect changes to it. Was Nietzsche pro-war? Sort of. He held at the very least that conflict between powerful organisms, peoples or states was inevitable and natural, and that great things are cultivated in war and won by war. He said that “truth is a woman… and loves only a warrior,” and noted that all great societies were founded after barbarians emerged from an orgy of bloodshed. He gives a nuanced view on war in Human, All Too Human, 444: War . One can say against war that it makes the victor stupid and the vanquished malicious. In favor of war, one can say that it barbarizes through both these effects and thus makes man more natural; war is the sleep or wintertime of culture: emerges from it with more strength, both for the good and for the bad. Were Nietzsche’s views on war unique or peculiar? Not in Germany, and not at the time, no. Helmuth von Moltke the Elder, for example, who was the uncle of one of the top military brass for Germany in WWI, and a statesmen himself, penned a letter to an international law expert in praise of war: Eternal peace is a dream --and not even a beautiful one. War is part of God's world-order. Within it unfold the noblest virtues of men, courage and renunciation, loyalty to duty and readiness for sacrifice--at the hazzard of one's life. Without war the world would sink into a swamp of materialism. The idea that peace in and of itself is good had not yet seen full purchase in Europe in Nietzsche’s day. This kind of attitude particularly among Germans was in vogue – both when Nietzsche lived, and in the decades during and leading up to the rise of the Nazis. Was Nietzsche an irrationalist? It depends on how you define the term. On the one hand, Nietzsche questioned that humans had a pure “will to truth” – believing instead that our will to know the truth was an expression of our will to power. That is to say: we value knowing that which gains us an advantage, or is pleasurable to us, or provides some usefulness; the notion that we value the truth in and of itself simply because it is the truth is simply not reality in N’s view. He believed that, paradoxically, our will to know the truth had revealed that the truth itself is not inherently valuable, and that all our most valuable human achievements, in fact, were based on lies (see the preface/first section of BGE). On the other hand, he praised Voltaire and the Enlightenment thinkers for following reason wherever it led, and believed in a scientific approach and spirit. He wrote, in a letter to his sister, “Here the ways of men divide. If you wish to strive for peace of soul and happiness, then believe; if you wish to be a disciple of truth, then inquire.” Was Nietzsche Anti-Democratic? Broadly speaking, yes. These views were instilled in Nietzsche rather early, as expressed by his favorites Theognis and Plato – Greek aristocrats who believed strongly in a classist society. Again, this view springs from a distrust in the quality of ordinary people, and of a belief in the stupidity/fickleness of crowds. As stated, however, this distrust of democracy also led him to distrust political parties. His viewpoint on social movements is typical of the reactionary – he cautions against large or swift changes to the existing political order. While he was critical of dynastic rule, he opposed the idea of transferring power to the people. Were his views on democracy unique or peculiar? While Europe was certainly on the path to democratizing in the 19th century, there was still an ongoing civilizational debate on democracy – with many conservatives and monarchists opposing mass action or social changes. Schopenhauer, for example, invited Austrian soldiers into his apartment after the Frankfurt Uprising, so that they could shoot at revolutionaries (and, as the soldiers departed, gave the officer his opera glasses, so he could take better aim at the rebels!) Was Nietzsche in support of eugenics? Yes, in the broad sense. He was a Lamarckian, and therefore believed that talents and skills could be passed down from generation to generation – such that one person could be genetically predisposed for rulership, and another predisposed to becoming a blacksmith or some other trade. He expressed similar views even before becoming fully Lamarckian, writing, “It is reasonable to develop further the talent that one's father or grandfather worked hard at, and not switch to something entirely new; otherwise one is depriving himself of the chance to attain perfection in some one craft. Thus the saying: ‘Which street should you take? – that of your ancestors’” (HH 592). Were Nietzsche’s views on eugenics unique or peculiar? To quote Robert Solomon, “almost every intellectual of the period took eugenics seriously (including George Bernard Shaw in England). Hitler’s use of the gas chamber in the service of his own perverse plan to shape the species was not a strategy Nietzsche either suggested or imagined.” Conclusion There is still plenty of room for open discussion – as to whether Nietzsche’s aristocratic views are fascist or proto-fascist, for example, or as to how significant or influential his ideas on eugenics were compared to other thinkers of the time, or any number of other questions. But it seems that, in the most definitive respects, Nietzsche would have been vigorously opposed to the Nazi party. He opposed anti-Semitism, had a love for the Jews, and meanwhile criticized the German people and their culture. That Germany would commit a genocide against the Jewish people could be described as Nietzsche’s worst nightmare. When I argue that the crimes of the Nazis overshadow all other considerations, I mean that the crimes of the Nazis would have been most significant to Nietzsche also – we should scarcely believe that he would have been happy that they adopted his advice for an emphasis on physical education in schools, when they were murdering a people to whom he felt deep gratitude. Not to mention that they were selectively editing his essays in those same schools in order to misrepresent his beliefs. Perhaps Nietzsche’s is the same fate as that of Karl Marx – who would likely have been horrified to learn how many millions of deaths are now popularly associated with his own work and ideas. Whatever their misunderstandings or willful ignorance as to what these men actually said, genocidal men attributed their actions to them. During WWII, some German soldiers went into battle with copies of Zarathustra . An irony so bitter that it is downright Shakespearean. Sources Nietzsche and the Nazis: A Personal View by Stephen Hicks, Ph.D (Ockham’s Razor Publishing, 2006, 2010.) The Legend of the Anti-Christ: A History by Stephen J. Vicchio (2009) Nietzsche, Philosopher, Psychologist, Antchrist by Walter Kaufmann (Fourth Edition, Princeton University Press, 1974) Gisela Deesz, Die Entwicklung des Nietzsche-Bildes in Deutschland (1933) What Nietzsche Really Said by Robert C. Solomon (Schocken Books, 2000) Schopenhauer: A Biography, by David Cartwright (Cambridge University Press, 2010) The Life of Richard Wagner by Ernest Newman (1946) The Anatomy of a Dictator in Hitler: The Man and the Military Leader by Percy Ernst Schramm (Robert E. Kreiger Publishing Company, 1978) On the Nature of War by Helmut Moltke (the Elder), (1880) [Source: Harry Pross, Die Zerstörung der deutschen Politik: Dokumente 1871-1933 (Frankfurt, 1959), pp. 29-31. Translated by Richard S. Levy] And, of course, Nietzsche’s own words: Human, All Too Human Thus Spoke Zarathustra Beyond Good & Evil Genealogy of Morality The Case of Wagner The Antichrist Ecce Homo Nietzsche Contra Wagner The Will to Power Online Resources http://www.stephenhicks.org/nietzsche-and-the-nazis/ https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Selected_Letters_of_Friedrich_Nietzsche http://nietzsche.holtof.com/reader/index.html Further Reading The Uses and Abuses of Nietzsche in the Third Reich: Alfred Baeumler's 'Heroic Realism' by Max Whyte (Journal of Contemporary History Vol. 43, No. 2, Apr., 2008) https://www.jstor.org/stable/30036502?seq=1 Nietzsche, Wagner and Ernest Newman by Roger Hollinrake (Music & Letters, Vol. 41, No. 3, Jul., 1960) https://www.jstor.org/stable/731971?seq=1